K N O W L E D G E A N D M E M O R Y
37 RAG, retrieval augmented
generation
A model only knows what was in its training data and what fits in the
context window. RAG fixes both. It fetches the most relevant pieces of your
own data at question time and drops them into the prompt, so the model
answers from fresh, private knowledge instead of guessing, and can even
cite its sources.
Indexing, done ahead of time
Documents
Chunks
Embed
Vector DB
stores meaning
Query, at question time
Question
Embed
Top chunks
most similar
Model
answer using them
search
top-k
Documents are chunked and embedded ahead of time. A question retrieves the
closest chunks and feeds them to the model.
How it works, in two phases
First, indexing, done ahead of time. You split your documents into chunks, turn each chunk into an
embedding (a vector of numbers that captures its meaning), and store those vectors in a vector
database. Chunks with similar meaning end up close together in that vector space.
Then, at query time, you embed the user's question the same way, search the vector database for
the chunks whose vectors are closest to it, and paste those chunks into the prompt as context. The
model then answers using that retrieved text. The quality of what you retrieve decides the quality of
the answer, so retrieval is the heart of RAG.

PYTHON
def answer_with_rag(question, vector_db, client):
q_vec = embed(question)                        # same embedder as
indexing
chunks = vector_db.search(q_vec, top_k=5)      # nearest chunks by
meaning
context = "\n\n".join(c.text for c in chunks)
prompt = f"""Answer using ONLY the context below. Cite the source ids.
Context:
{context}
Question: {question}"""
resp = client.messages.create(
model="claude-sonnet-4-5", max_tokens=500,
messages=[{"role": "user", "content": prompt}],
)
return resp.content[0].text
E M B E D D I N G S A N D V E C T O R S E A R C H , P L A I N L Y
An embedding turns a piece of text into a point in a high dimensional space where nearness
means similar meaning. So "how do I reset my password" lands near a support article about
password resets, even if they share no exact words. Vector search is just finding the nearest
points to your question, which is why RAG retrieves by meaning rather than keyword.
PROS
Answers from fresh, private data the
model never trained on
Fewer hallucinations, since the model is
grounded in real text
You can show citations back to the
source chunks
Cheaper and faster to update than
retraining the model
CONS
Bad retrieval means a confident but
wrong answer
Chunking and embedding choices
strongly affect quality
Retrieved text still competes for the
context budget
Adds a vector database and a pipeline
to maintain

GOING DEEPER
Why retrieval quality is the whole game
RAG lives or dies on what you retrieve, because the model can only answer from the chunks you
hand it. Two levers dominate. Chunking decides how documents are split: chunks too large dilute
the relevant sentence, too small lose context, so a sensible size with a little overlap matters a lot.
Retrieval decides what comes back: pure vector search finds semantic matches, but combining it
with keyword search (hybrid search) and then re ranking the top results with a stronger model
catches cases where meaning and exact terms both matter. Get retrieval right and the generation
step is easy; get it wrong and no prompt can save the answer.
Q
Q = question, teal = relevant chunks nearby, grey = irrelevant chunks far away
retrieve the nearest by meaning
Embeddings place text so that similar meaning sits close together, so
retrieval is just finding the nearest points to the question.
RAG
Fine-tuning
Best for
fresh or private facts, citations
changing style, format, or behavior
Update cost
cheap, just re index
expensive, retrain
Risk
bad retrieval gives wrong facts
can forget or drift
STEP BY STEP
RAG has two phases: build the index once, then use it on every question.

Indexing, once
Answering, per question
Split your documents into chunks.
1
Turn each chunk into an embedding vector.
2
Store the vectors in a vector database.
3
Embed the user's question with the same embedder.
1
Search the vector database for the closest chunks by meaning.
2
Paste those chunks into the prompt as context.
3
Ask the model to answer using only that context, and return the answer with citations.
4
